I've talked to people from the whole
range the whole spectrum of the freely
ratha for phenomenon I've talked to true
believers of talk to people who lost
their faith I've talked to people who
participated you know in person and
events in Thailand people who used to be
leaders and who went from being leaders
to becoming critics we definitely come
to a point in this phenomenon where
people are starting to look back at it
as something that's in the past tense
they're writing the history so to speak
of the wonder that was freelee the
banana girl and her short-lived but
seemingly important and influential
dietary / political movement but we've
also come to a point where people forget
people forget what it was they believed
it and people forget why and how this
became such a big deal to people and how
it totally changed people's lives um
give an example you talk to people today
and they often refer to the rato for
diet as if it were the somewhat relaxed
diet you see freely herself what what
you see her eating on her own videos
today there was a time not too long ago
when this diet really taught people that
in order to be one of us in order to be
an insider in this movement you needed
to completely refuse to eat salt
completely refused to eat oil or any
food that had overt fats in an oil of
any kind you need to completely refuse
to eat garlic so a normal meal at a
Chinese restaurant a Chinese restaurant
that might have a couple of vegan
options became impossible for people and
you know the passion and fervor with
which people denounced one another for
failing to live up the standards of this
diet I can remember very clearly I think
a lot of people they sort of forget and
then in conversation if you remind them
they you know different examples that
they saw themselves come to mind but I
remember one video in which a raw till 4
follower of true believer was bitterly
viciously denouncing hennya Hannya mania
a vegan who used to be a leader in that
movement used to be a true believer and
became a
became a disillusioned crestfallen
person outside of the movement um I
remember this vitriolic bitter critique
of Hannya because she ate oatmeal for
breakfast and the guy making this video
he had seen her eat oatmeal for
breakfast at a time when she claimed to
be on the Rafah tell for diet
now obviously oatmeal is not a raw food
um she wasn't eating raw shoes he cooked
and happy she was eating breakfast for 4
p.m. so there's a sense in which this is
just self-evidently true but I think
it's easy for people now to forget no
this is something people really believed
in people really shamed each other for
failing to live up to these standards
and people so passionately want to be
insiders in this movement that in the
one hand they did they did reshape their
lives they totally changed their lives
to fit in and the other hand when they
failed to fit in they lied about it like
lying about eating oatmeal for breakfast
and you know part of the crumbling of
the movement no doubt has been a
relaxation of those standards to the
point where people now started to forget
about just how crazy was people let's
sketch out here what were the sort of
fundamental elements what were the
fundamentals that defined this movement
when it came up when it became such an
important thing to so many people point
one on my list here I think is the
rejection of medical science itself and
the so called self healing movement or
self healing aspect of what was taught
again people now forget this was huge
and when Frehley was first emerging from
the chat rooms and message boards of the
vegan demi-monde
and there's a time when she was new on
YouTube and when YouTube wasn't the most
important platform there were really a
lot of chat rooms
she came up out of a subculture that was
already very hardened in its opposition
to the medical establishment to the
medical mainstream and I think one of
the deepest beliefs one of the most
powerful sentiments at the basis of the
popularity of rato for in its early days
and maybe now along with the dying away
of rattle for itself maybe now it's
dying away
was the conviction that food could be
used as medicine that the vegan diet was
itself a challenge to the whole medical
establishment to the whole
pharmaceutical industry that this was a
notion that you could heal yourself you
could quit your meds whether you had a
tremendously serious physical disease
like Crohn's disease like diabetes that
you could reject the authority and
expertise of your medical doctor and get
on this vegan diet and heal yourself or
even if you had a psychological disorder
even if you for example even if you were
for example diagnosed with schizophrenia
or perhaps you were diagnosed with
bipolar disorder you were on heavy
medication for those types of mental
problems so there was a deep-seated
conviction here that sort of cuts both
ways on the one hand it claims that you
ought to be able to heal yourself simply
through diet exercise and sleep sleep is
in there improving your your sleep um
and the other hand there's also approach
to anyone who claims to be an expert
whether it's a dietitian or a medical
doctor chemist or what-have-you
just as the followers of this movement
claim that they can heal themselves
through food as medicine through
so-called natural hygiene natural
medicine these notions they also think
that if these doctors were truly experts
they would be able to heal themselves so
suddenly I mean this this links up to
the fat shaming elements fat for that
frankly the fat shaming psychosis of the
movement this is paired with the
attitude that your doctor can't possibly
know what he's talking about if he
doesn't have a body like freely and
meanwhile freely openly says she has
always said she still says that her
credentials are her body her physical
appearance is the only credential she
needs and she claims the fact that it is
effortless for her to maintain that body
so freely herself is someone who
actively rejects the authority of
doctors dietary experts etc because they
claim to know what they're talking about
while lacking this crucial credential of
having
having a body with visible abdominal
muscles they're not beautiful enough
they're not slim enough they're not
healthy enough using a very superficial
measure of Health and at the same time
she's claiming that the results she gets
from her own diet that this makes her
more of an authority than the
accumulated wisdom of all the medical
experts in the establishment now again
today that may seem laughable for
someone who looks at those old videos
with the sober second thought of the
world as we know what 2016 may seem
ridiculous but again this really emerged
from a subculture on message boards and
chat rooms that already really accepted
a certain degree of anti medical
establishment hysteria and for many
people that was linked to the
anti-vaccine movement the belief that
vaccines were a massive medical
conspiracy for people who were members
of the real so-called natural hygiene
movement they they even believe that the
concept of a virus is a sort of
conspiracy that governments and
hospitals are engaged in and that most
of the pharmaceutical industry is some
kind of vast immoral conspiracy now
that's partly of course vegan opposition
to vivisection experimenting on animals
but I mean it extends to I've had vegans
passionately and sincerely tell me that
I ought to believe and take seriously a
theory that hiv/aids doesn't exist that
hiv/aids is fictional so to just call
this pseudoscience is a little bit too
shallow as a little misleading and
sentimentally I think some of these
people truly hate I mean hate is the
word medical doctors the you know heat
and fear they hate medical doctors they
fear hospitals they fear the cold hard
truths of modern medical science and
obviously the line that freely was
presenting freely and Rotel for broadly
speaking this was a much needed shelter
for some people who wanted to escape
that reality it presented a very
appealing escapist fantasy for some of
those people
point two on my list here so we've
talked about rejection of Medical
Authority scientific Authority is the
rejection of parental authority and I
think it's important to point out this
is really a kind of double-edged sword
this cuts into directions on the one
hand yes there's a there's a rich
discourse here of actually challenging
or rejecting your own parents so saying
to your mom and dad you don't understand
me I need to go to Thailand and become
an athlete an athlete in quotation marks
a comeback to that the meaning of the
word athlete within this movement is
itself bizarre um
rejection of the authority of one's own
parents but it's also a rejection of
one's self as a parental authority so
these are linked in a psychologically
dynamic way that will be familiar to
people of a background in cult studies
or in studying religions that get into
the cult category of things and social
sciences um
[Music]
the obsession with vasectomies the
obsession with rejecting the possibility
that you will become a parent that you
could be a good parent that parenting
and raising children could be a positive
part of a vegan lifestyle on the one
hand yes this is linked to a sort of
teenage ecological extremism the idea
that the whole planet is just
overpopulated but again it's also linked
to this general anti-authoritarian
notion that you kind of spit in the face
of your own parents and really sorry I
mean it's slight exaggeration Frehley
doesn't seem to disrespect her own
mother but there was a lot of material I
don't want to estimate how many hours
worth of material there is on YouTube
here about the presumed you know
confrontation with and rejection of
one's own parents that you should reject
the expectations your parents place on
you you should reject the expectation
that you will be economically productive
economically successful economically
competitive you reject the rat race so
to speak you reject a false notion of
happiness of accomplishment of false
ideology of upward mobility you you
reject if you like the roots of
capitalism as they were encountered
within your own family unit and then
you're also rejecting the expectations
your parents may place on you that you
should one day become a parent yourself
that you should carry on the legacy
you should have your own children so
that your parents can eventually so
there's a rejection in both directions
here the generation before and the
generation to come it's very powerful
and again it resembles some elements of
some cults that you are exempting
yourself from the economic and social
fabric of society you are exempting
yourself from your family you're no
longer a regular child and you're never
going to be a regular parent you're
supposedly an exceptional person to whom
those rules don't apply and to whom
those expectations don't apply somehow
what you're doing in pursuit of the
permanent vacation in pursuit of weight
loss and health raises you up above
these people and their expectations of
you and again when you consider what the
praxis of this cult or this movement
really is that's surprising because I
mean now if a buddhist cult tells you
that that to you you say well okay but
this buddhist cult is also teaching you
meditation and it's teaching you some
supernatural magics and a supernatural
cosmology like maybe you're even a
member of a buddhist cult that is
involved with ghosts you know ghosts
rituals okay so alright you joined the
Ghostbusters so it makes sense that
you're a special magical person because
you believe you have magical super
powers all right okay you can see the
logic of that um but this is a set of
cult beliefs that are based on happiness
health happiness physical beauty a
challenge to the medical system a form
of radical ecology it is it is very
peculiar but there's a dotted line
tracing this sense of personal
exceptionalism to saving the planet you
know to an ecological notion but it's a
it's a very difficult to trace started
lying hmm so yeah that's actually the
next point in my list is is radical
ecology and really I'm not gonna say too
much about this but people forget if
you've been keeping up with what's been
going on in veganism for say four years
I think you'll remember this but many
many people just forget how deep this
ran how crazy this was how many people
today who even people who are really
fans of rato for fans of freely
many of you today can really remember
catchphrases like burn rubber not gas
there were other variations of it like
burn calories not fossil fuels you know
that by riding a bicycle this was part
of the moral backbone of the movement
and there was a lot of really crass and
insulting talk along the lines of anyone
who drives a car is a parasite on the
planet is destroying the planet sense of
moral superiority and complete contempt
for anyone who has a job that involves
driving a car now I just mentioned it
serves my own ads here I have never
driven a car I've never owned a car but
everything I buy like this shirt or you
know these books they were delivered at
some point on a truck or a car or all
you know or train or all the above so it
is obviously on some level I have my own
ecological sentiments on some level all
of us can relate but this movement
raised those sentiments to a to a fever
pitch of self-righteousness that
certainly resembles insanity and again I
think you have to talk to people
face-to-face in a context where they
really feel comfortable admitting to you
how much this reshaped their lives but
there were people who got rid of their
cars there were people who quit their
jobs so that they could ride a bicycle
you know there were people who really
felt this as a moral you know call as
something that that took ahold of their
soul obviously all these points this
list they're all rolled into one package
but part of the initial impetus the
moral superiority complex that was built
into this cult-like movement for people
um definitely you know the radical
ecology aspect so again this is linked
to that refusal to have children their
refusal to own a car their refusal eat
garlic their refusal to drink coffee
even those the these each one of these
things may seem small and meaningless
role together it's quite powerful now
already most vegans are on a bit of an
ego trip that I'm aware of and I'm
self-critical of where they regard meat
eaters as morally inferior but now this
defense that anyone who drives a car is
morally inferior to you anyone who
drives a car and eats meat is this again
social parasite
destroying the planet this is the the
view of the world that these people are
drawn into step by step and again some
of you watching this will be sitting or
going yeah that's right
but even though maybe it's only one year
ago or two years ago since you really
saw that edge of it it seems so distant
now because so many of the fundamental
aspects of the movement have been
discredited so that's why I say worth
reflecting on worth remembering
and also course worth progressing past
one of the characteristics of this
movement that in some ways makes it
resemble a cult and some ways makes it
strikingly different from a cult is that
it is welcoming but severe it is open to
everyone and yet nobody is ever good
enough to me that's a very interesting
element that bears comparison to other
cults other new religious movements etc
what do I mean by this well the doors
are open anyone could watch freely on
YouTube anyone could buy an airplane
ticket to Thailand unless they were
blacklisted in the dance and so on
[Music]
there's a sense of which anyone could
sign up without even signing a piece of
paper
anyone could start to participate in the
forums anyone could buy the diet book
anyone could buy a juicer and start
juicing and again when he talked people
are honest they often reflect on exactly
these things I've seen several people
reflecting the fact that they even
changed the furniture within their own
house to more closely resemble the
furniture they saw at that time on
freelee's channel you know so that we're
sitting on the floor instead of eating
at a table so that their fruit was laid
out on a tarp on the ground instead of
you know having normal kitchen habits
you know anything this wasn't required
of people they just a lot of people
really respond this cold way has opened
all and you could start of course
uploading your own videos you could
start repeating the same mantras the
same slogans you could in a sense join
this political movement and start making
this difference in this imaginary way
you could start engaging in the same
lifestyle activism which crucially was
centered on convincing other people that
you were so happy that you were so
healthy because you were living this way
it was welcoming it was open to all but
as soon as you come in you learned that
nobody's ever really good enough it
seems like nobody's getting the results
that they're supposed to be getting
that's one riddle because of course the
diet advice doesn't really work but also
the code of purity involved that seems
like nobody's ever pure enough people
are always getting denounced for things
know already the lists have mentioned
you're supposed to eat zero salt zero
oil zero overt fats zero garlic zero
caffeine you're not allowed to eat
oatmeal for breakfast people's brothel
for obviously etc etc you're now not
allowed to drive a car and allowed to
use gasoline but there's always an
invisible list of things where people
could cross some unknowable line and get
denounced which happened week by week on
YouTube and people watched and respond
to that very closely I talked to one man
who was gay and is gay and you know when
certain statements were made about
homosexuality suddenly the sense was the
lines shifted who's in and who's out who
accepts this new doctrine that you know
being gay as a choice this was at the
time this is big news and some people
got kicked out and some people adjusted
their attitudes in order to stay in and
so on um so as I say welcoming but
severe open to all but as soon as people
come in you realize that nobody's good
enough nobody's living up to the
standard again interesting comparison to
some some Buddhist cults and where the
objectives of what you're doing are
supposed to be supernatural or
inevitable ineffable or you know involve
a you know surreal cosmology with ghosts
and gods and multiple incarnations but
while on the one hand there are all
these elements of the cult that elevate
your sense of self-esteem that tell you
you're special you're exceptional you're
buckin ly you're better than your own
brothers and sisters you're better than
your boss at work you're better than
almost everybody you know because
everybody you know is either you know
eating meat or using gasoline you know
these other things um but on the other
hand you're dealing with this sense of
dejection because you're never as good
as freely never and of course she
especially viciously denounced some
women who
were competitors you know who could have
been claimants to the same type of fame
same type of influence same to have a
dietary advice or what have you I think
enough said about that those who who
remember you'll know what I'm talking
about but I admit I'm not really
spelling out fully here the types of
lines that people were always crossing
and people were being punished for
people being denounced for but
definitely anyone who slips through this
fair time will remember people who one
week were being praised as being real
you know diehard supporters the cause
and leaders of the cause the next week
would be denounced as fake as fake as
as being not real and and as
violating some combination of the the
precepts stated and unstated that
defined who was an insider who was an
outsider
um I think another element here I was
reminded of recently is actually open
opening up the identity of the jock of
the athlete itself now just digress for
a moment here what does it mean to be an
athlete where I grew up in Canada the
notion of who is an athlete is very
narrow indeed you're not an athlete just
because you go to the gym you're not an
athlete just because you casually play
basketball for instance on the street
you know on a street court or we play
hockey on the street and Canada people
play hockey on the street in Canada
where I grew up to be an athlete means
you play competitive sports at a
competitive level period so you rank
your in the charts and the you know
swagger the self-importance that
athletes exhibit in Canadian society
which may be less than Australian
society it may be more than some other
society that corresponds to the type of
sacrifices they're supposed to be making
to be at that competitive level all
kinds of people
countless I mean I've seen so many
examples of people who in reality were
shy hippie types let's be quite specific
they were shy hippies who maybe did yoga
before they got into Rocco for suddenly
started describing themselves as
athletes
and acting with the self confidence and
arrogance of an athlete or of a
stereotypical jock people who had never
been tough guys started imitating the
tough-guy behavior of the leaders of
righto four people started talking about
themselves as athletes and talking about
athleticism as part of this movement in
a way that to me is surreal and now I
don't I don't really want to hate on any
of these people like in a sense
anyone can come on the internet and say
they're an athlete you know I don't hate
you for that
but that contrast is really bizarre and
the self-confidence those people are
exhibiting to me rings hollow and false
all the time I've seen people come on
again imitating the leaders of rato for
describing themselves as jocks as
athletes as alpha personalities as
domineering natural leaders and even
while they're saying it I look in their
eye I think you've never led anything
you've never been in a competitive
sports league of any kind like not even
you know not not even at a low level you
don't know what it's like to have to
wake up at 5:30 in the morning and show
up at 6:00 a.m. and be yelled at by your
coach to be denigrated by a coach in a
team sport which is not nice I mean
again one of the reasons why a lot of
athletes can be nasty is that their
themselves getting yelled at and
denigrated by their coach or by the more
senior players by the better players
they're they're being held up to kind of
impossible standards all the time now
again I'm not saying this I'm not
glorifying what it means to be an
athlete but this movement suddenly
opened up the identity of the athlete
and again in a really kind of morally
seductive way linked at lettis ISM to
activism and erase the boundary between
the two so that people began to think of
athleticism as activism and began to
think that the only true activists were
athletes so I guess that leads in nicely
to the next topic which is the concept
of lifestyle activism itself which
presented a powerful and seductive
illusion that what you needed to do to
change the world to save the planet to
save the animals
to promote veganism was simply to
communicate that you were healthy and
happy was simply to glorify the
lifestyle itself in part through
self-indulgence that by being on
permanent vacation for example but not
necessarily not everyone was on
permutation but by going on vacation and
filming yourself in your bikini showing
what you eat showing how happy you are
showing how health you are making
testimonials which is like many other
cult groups coming on camera and saying
you used to have this disease and you
cured it used to have this disorder and
you cured it how you bought the diet
book you followed the diet you changed
your whole life you became athletic
before you are couch potato you started
riding your bicycle you started eating
exactly what the book tells you to eat
and lo and behold your diseases were
cured and fill-in-the-blank as some of
you guys have heard this a hundred times
before and some of you will have heard
like maybe not a hundred times but at
least 20 times people who read who
performed that script people who came on
camera with great conviction and told
that's you and they later admit actually
their illness was never cured their
illness kept coming back again and again
actually their medical problem whatever
it was wasn't solved by this peculiar
vegan diet and you know they're all
they're often other you know confessions
maybe the the change in their exercise
habits wasn't so great maybe the change
in their their weight loss or what key
he wasn't so great and so on many many
people who later reconsider their
position within the cult have recanted
that narrative but for a brief period is
very stuck to two people
the line between activist and athlete
was blurred and the notion that the the
the great secret I mean the the great
catalyst for social change in this
planet is happiness is you is your
personal happiness that all you have to
do is share with the world how happy and
how healthy you are that's a powerful
delusion that appeals to people at all
ages people who feel powerless I think
there are sixteen year olds who are
still in high school who saw that and it
called out to them they thought that's
me that's what I can do I can put on a
bikini I can tell people that I've cured
my acne or cured Crohn's disease or cure
diabetes or cured schizophrenia through
this diet I can come on and make these
testimonials I can film myself having
fun I can show how happy I am to ride a
bicycle riding a bicycle does not make
you that happy okay that's ridiculous
that in itself is ridiculous I can talk
about my personal transformation how
five minutes ago I was a hippie who had
no self-confidence and was shy and now
I'm an athlete with this very
confrontational attitude this type of
because if this is part of it right was
this transformation that made powerless
people feel powerful and it linked their
totally subjective sense of health and
happiness to saving the planet and again
looking at that now in 2016 it seems
like a totally absurd delusion but
looking back over the last four years
there were people who wanted to believe
in that and who fiercely defended their
right to believe in it and again I mean
someone like Kenya panamania who later
lost her faith you can hear her
reflecting that whenever someone said
something to challenge the orthodoxy of
the diet even when that diet was making
her personally more and more sick or
actually her health problems were
continuing she was going to hospitals
trying to get help she's having many
many health problems she would herself
viciously attack and denounce other
people who questioned the health impacts
of the diet or question the the
miraculous results that you know she's
admitted this in reflecting afterwards
that she that the need for her to defend
the cause was so strong you know she had
to believe in this book shed believe in
this in this method and so on so what
I've left of the absolute end of this
video was health weight loss physical
beauty and I think that's just because
I've had other videos talking about that
I got an email with in patreon I got a
message from a patreon supporter and she
was over well into her 20s over so let's
see she was 24 years old he was just 24
26 but she admitted to me that the first
time she saw the image of freelee's
midsection of those abdominal muscles of
that shape of that part of her body she
just thought I'm gonna do it I'm gonna
do whatever this woman says I'm gonna
fold whatever advice she says so I
can get those results so I can look like
that
and ironically I've seen photos of this
woman in videos this woman you know
before during and after she was in great
shape she was already a very athletic
person before she became a follower at
this cult and she gained weight and got
out of shape because she did follow the
rato for diet as many many people have
of a long interview with Leah Leah pram
so it gained a lot of weight on this
channel just scroll back a few videos
you'll see that it's an interview with
someone who had that experience um yes
vanity yes wanting to be beautiful yes
that's something that drew people in but
as much as we might talk about it I
think now in looking back and writing
history the wonder that was freely in
the auto for phenomenon I think we
forget that even though that got
people's attention it's easy to forget
that these other factors that I've just
enumerated were what kept people inside
well what made this something that had
political and even spiritual
ramifications that made people believe
this wasn't just about their vanity this
wasn't just about having great abdominal
muscles or a great figure that this was
about saving the planet and on some
level I wish I could say that that
spirit that enthusiasm could be
recaptured could be saved could be
channeled into a more positive a more
political more pragmatic a more
genuinely helpful and even dare I say a
more nutritious form of veganism but I
don't think you can I think the wonder
that was freely in the righto for diet
as a chapter in history of this movement
as unique and bizarre as the an Urkel
primitiveness chapter you can search
that much channeling here my work said
that that came and went before as unique
in bizarre as the Deep Ecology movement
that came and went one ideology after
another comes and goes I think right now
the abolitionist movement of Gary France
neonate we're seeing it come and go
direct action everywhere I think we've
seen one fad after another come and go
and yes a lot of people have powerful
sentiments they want to help they want
to make the world a better place
but they become members of cult-like
movements that have all the wrong
answers because fundamentally they start
by asking all the wrong
questions